---
###
# unit information: 
# Manifestations of Multimedia: VR 
###
title: "Virtual Reality"
number: 10.1
short_description: 
summary: "Virtual Reality (VR) has been a useful tool for many applications as well as designing experiences: from training simulations to immersive gaming. Although VR has been around since the late 60s and technological advances have made it more and more popular these days, VR has yet to become a feature of the average household. We have some way to go before we can become the natives of this new medium. So what can we do with it in the meantime? What are the benefits, constraints and challenges of this new medium, and how can we use it to create new artistic works?"

authors: 
- name: Konstantina Orlandatou
  website: ""
topics: []

references:

flyer: "Mutor_KonstantinaThomas_f.jpg"

###
# page layout:
# don't change
###
layout: unit
citations: ""
mathjax: true
---

{% include unit_preamble.md %}

<!-- remove this when there is an animation -->
<div style="text-align:center">
<img src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/flyers/{{ page.flyer }}" style="width:50%;">
</div>
<!-- snip -->

# Introduction

The term “Virtual reality” (VR) has been used throughout the years
in various ways depending on the context. In the 14th century the
word “virtual” was used to describe the state of being something in
essence or effect but not in presence or in a physical way. In the
late 1930’s Antonin Artaud used the term to describe the characters
and objects of a theatrical screenplay in his collection of essays
*“Le Théâtre et son double”* (1938). It is Jaron Lanier, however, who
is credited with popularizing the term as well as founding the field
of virtual reality.

Nowadays, four main definitions co-exist to describe possible
relations between the real and virtual worlds: mixed reality (MR),
extended reality (XR), augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality
(VR). These terms can cause some confusion and are not easy to
differentiate, but we can begin by considering them as two poles of
a continuum, rather than two separate entities (see illustration
below).

Extended Reality (XR) is a broad term that refers to immersive
technologies that allow human-machine interaction between
computer-generated virtual environments and the real world.

Mixed Reality (MR) describes the hybridity between reality and
virtuality.

Augmented Reality (AR) takes place in the physical world. Through
AR, this physical world is enriched by computer generated, mostly
perceptual, information. That means that an object that exists in
the physical world can be “augmented” to something different and new
in real-time. For example, a tree pops out of a ball—the ball is
there physically in the real world and the tree is added virtually
into the real world. On the contrary, virtual Reality (VR) takes
place completely in the virtual world without any reference to the
real world.

For AR experiences, specific technologies are used, such as the
Microsoft HoloLens or the Magic Leap. Similarly, VR experiences rely
on specialized technologies such as the HTC Vive or the Oculus Rift,
both of which are head-mounted displays (HMD)

{% include img-figure url="./Illustration1.png" 
description="Real and virtual world as a continuum" %}

# Some History and the Current State of VR Technologies Now

The vision of VR already existed in the 1960s. The cinematographer
Morton Heilig developed the “Sensorama” (1962), an apparatus for a
holistic cinematic experience. Through a boxed-like display the
person seated on a chair could see images, which were displayed on
every side of the box, simulating a 3D visual effect. Additionally,
the person could smell different aromas, hear stereophonic sounds
and have their body tilted since the chair was able to rotate in
both axes.  The device was patented in the USA and is considered to
be the ancestor of 4D cinema.

{% include img-figure url="./Sensorama.jpg" 
description="Heilig's Sensorama" %}

Some years later, Ivan Sutherland published an essay called “The
Ultimate Display” (1965) where he describes a display that is
connected to a digital computer that *“gives us a chance to gain
familiarity with concepts not realizable in the physical world. It
is a looking glass into a mathematical wonderland”*. Sutherland, who
is considered to be the pioneer of computer graphics, was able to
construct the first head-mounted display (HMD) which was extremely
heavy and therefore was hanging from the ceiling. The idea was that
the one would look through the display and by rotating one’s head to
the left or to the right the person could move and navigate through
the virtual graphic environment. On this specific HMD, which is the
ancestor of current HMDs, Sutherland published the paper “A
head-mounted three dimensional display” (1968).

{% include img-figure url="./Sutherland_HMD.png" 
description="Sutherland's head-mounted display" %}

It is impossible to sum up in just a few lines all of the
technological advances that took place between the 1970s and today,
however it is worth pointing out NASA’s developments for the Virtual
Interface Environment Workstations (1988). An HMD as well as a data
glove were designed and developed in order to simulate operational
tasks related to space aviation such as telerobotic or telepresence
control of remotely operated devices.

{% include img-figure url="./NASA_view.png" 
description="Head-coupled stereoscopic display with DataGlove" %}

The biggest milestone in the development of virtual reality products
was the company Virtual Programming Languages Research founded by
Jaron Lanier in 1984. The most well-known products were the
DataGlove and the EyePhone. In 1994 the Forte Technologies company
brought to market the VFX1 Headgear, the first affordable HMD for
the end user. In 2011 Sony produced the HMZ-T1 headset, the first 3D
capable HMD with a high definition OLED display. Nowadays, the most
popular VR toolkits are the Oculus Rift and the Vive Toolkit by the
company HTC.

VR technologies are used in various fields for different purposes
from training simulations up to post-traumatic therapies and
entertainment. There is a big variety of VR headsets and controllers
(among others: Oculus Rift touch controllers, Vive controllers,
Valve Index controllers or PSVR controllers) that allow all kinds of
interaction and creative possibilities. However, the cost of these
technologies is still high for the end user, which means that VR
isn’t freely accessible to everyone yet. Many of us don’t possess a
VR headset at home and maybe some of us have not even experienced VR
yet. This indicates that we are lacking practice with this new
medium and at this moment we cannot be considered native users of
it. We have a lot to learn from a medium that is continuously
developing. What are the benefits, the constraints and the
challenges that this new medium provides?


# Benefits of VR Technologies

Being able to create new imaginary worlds that don’t and can’t exist
in the real world, is one of the biggest challenges and excitements
of virtual reality. But do these worlds have to obey the laws of
physics? A question to which we will return later.

The medium is suitable to transform video games into a highly
immersive experience. The user can dive in the video-game world and
be part of it. VR has been used also as a technology for the
realization of escape games. In the multiplayer VR Escape Room
“Huxley”, the user is immersed in the year 3007AD where mankind has
been replaced by machines and has 45min to solve a puzzle and save
the world. In the VR application “Dream of Dali” the user has the
possibility to explore the surrealistic fictional world of Salvador
Dali’s painting “Archaeological Reminiscence of Millet’s Angelus”,
where over-sized creatures pass over the head of the user. Another
function that VR technologies enable is the re-creation of worlds
that either don’t exist or aren’t accessible anymore. For example,
we can restore the Colosseum to its original state and visit it
virtually or take a walk through the streets of San Francisco just
by connecting a VR headset with the Google Earth application.

VR has become a permanent feature for immersive learning experiences
providing, in many fields, the possibility of recreating real life
settings and simulations of work challenges. This has been
particularly beneficial in areas that deal with purpose-created
scenarios and crisis management, hands-on experiences, skills
analysis and decision making, and remote training.

VR technologies can be also very useful for art mediation and
education. In the project [“Moving Sound
Pictures”](https://www.hfmt-hamburg.de/innovative-hochschule/moving-sound-pictures/)
paintings are transformed into 3D spaces in which the user has the
opportunity to touch, move or enlarge the objects in the painting
and to create music through these actions. But it's not just about
interaction and music. In addition to these playful actions, the
user gets information about the artwork and its history. While the
user interacts with the VR environment, the transfer of knowledge
takes place on this virtual stage at the same time. So far, two
parts of the project have been completed. In the first part called
"The Abstract Painters" four paintings of the Abstract Era between
1916 - 1924 by Kasimir Malevich, El Lissitzky, Piet Mondrian and
Wassily Kandinsky were transferred into a VR environment and dressed
up musically. The user enters a gallery designed in the style of the
1920s, with a wallpaper in wine red colour and a shiny brown wooden
floor. The paintings hang on the walls like in an exhibition and act
as gateways into the walk-in virtual rooms: in the VR version of
Malevich’s painting “Suprematism” you can make the objects sound
with two mallets, in the VR version of Kandinsky’s “Merry Structure”
you can touch the objects with your hands and thus create music.  

{% include youtube-figure id="f0WeDa1nXAY" description="Moving Sound Pictures: The Abstract Painters" %}

In the second part called "Dali's Persistence of Memory" the
painting of the same name by Salvador Dali was transferred into a
virtual interactive landscape outdoors. In a desert landscape
surrounded by the sea, the sound of ticking melted clocks is
combined with the sound of the sea. The user can move freely and
discover this "musical" world through teleportation.

{% include youtube-figure id="_ZQ1gLqh2cU" description="Moving Sound Pictures: Salvator Dali" %}

These environments don’t strictly follow the laws of physics. For
example, yellow circles and multi-coloured triangles are gliding and
move smoothly on the air without falling down to the ground as the
case would be in the physical world. For the most part, we expect
that things in a VR environment behave exactly as they would behave
in the physical world. Whenever something breaks these “unwritten”
rules, it makes us feel uncomfortable or weird because it does not
fulfill our expectations. For example, in Kandinsky’s VR
environment, the big yellow circle stands up near the
ceiling. Normally the object, if it’s not hanging from somewhere,
should fall down because of gravity, but in a virtual world gravity
isn’t a “must”. Of course, we can simulate it but we do not have
to. While VR makes it possible to create worlds that don’t obey the
laws of physics, perhaps we must ask ourselves whether we “should”
create such worlds. On the other hand, we have so much freedom to
create environments that would seem fantastic to our reality, and
that is one of the biggest advantages but also the biggest challenge
in VR creation.

# Constraints and Challenges

HMDs are a window to a virtual world. When “wearing” an HMD we are
suddenly cut off from the physical world and we have the feeling
that we are physically present in a non-physical world. As such,
total immersion is reached through VR technologies. But what happens
with our senses and especially our body? Our body is somehow trapped
between two worlds: the physical and the virtual. Our brain and body
are going to simulate whatever happens in the virtual world. That
means that if you are on a roller coaster in VR but you are standing
in the physical world, you will still feel nauseous and possibly
even get sick. This sensory discrepancy is called “virtual reality
sickness”, which is similar to motion sickness. Walking or wandering
around in VR, the so-called locomotion, can be enabled by using
handheld controllers. Here, though the user can only walk within a
limited physical space in the real world without necessarily having
the same sized space in the virtual world. Teleportation (selecting
the spot where the user wants to teleport to in the space) is one
solution to solve the discrepancy between virtual and physical
space. If an obstacle is in your way in the virtual world, you will
feel the need to jump over it in the physical world although the
object doesn’t physically exist.

Inspired by the problem of how our perception works in virtual
worlds, in 2016 Rebecca Allen created the VR art installation INSIDE
([https://vimeo.com/420957109](https://vimeo.com/420957109)). In a
narrative VR environment, the user travels from a desert to a
prehistoric cave. The cave functions as a representation of the
human brain where the real world mixes with the “unreal”.  Images,
sounds, and virtual objects are mixed in this cave. The artist to
what extent our sensory perception can be altered when we are
immersed in a VR environment and the role of the human body in
VR. How can we enjoy such an environment, and do we find this
pleasant?

Another question that arises is that of the feeling of presence or
absence when emerging in VR environments. Do you have the feeling of
really being there or it is just an illusion? And what is that it
makes the experience real or illusive? High-end graphics? Or a 100%
representation of the real world?

In our current moment, none of these questions are easy to
answer. The puzzle of finding the right balance between actions in
the virtual world and the reaction of the body in the physical
world, as well as what this combination can make us feel, is already
mind breaking.

{% include unit_postamble.md %}
